# The Life of Syrus, Bishop of Genoa in Liguria

Most likely by the author Bishop Oberto

From Mombrizio and a manuscript of the Genoan Church

1\. [Author: the bishop] Faith grows in the increase of its advancement, the hope of the Catholic Church is strengthened, future rewards are weighed out, and charity is enlarged and made more firm in the Trinity, when the deeds of the holy Fathers are told. For which reason I, Pusillus,[^a] indeed a Bishop following the correct Doctrine[^b], relying on no education in eloquence and learning (nay more, being a man of small intelligence), an investigator of Divine Scriptures, and indeed enjoying only the love of the Saints; I have implored[^1] the Father and the Son and the Holy Spirit, who teach wisdom to man[^c]; just as even the Truth itself says: for it is not you who speak but the Spirit of your Father that speaks in you[d](#_ftn5). Therefore because I consider myself a Catholic and a lover of the true faith, although not lacking the stain of vices, under the weight of which sins I am choked; [having learned the Acts from the Elders], often stretched out on the ground, with poured-out prayer and tearful voice, I have begged for the unspeakable mercy of the all-powerful God; so that those things which I have learned from my predecessors, as the Holy Spirit revealed them, I might recall to the memory of this Christian population. On account of which a sermon arises in me concerning the holy and most blessed Confessor Syrus, [he causes[e](#_ftn6) it to be written by his Notary[f](#_ftn7)], indeed Priest of this Genoese Church, whose Life, with Christ as protector, I have made known by considering it by myself with the greatest veneration and care; but I took care that it should be written by my Notary too; not in grandeur, or in the false flattery of words, by which truth is always concealed and defrauded; but merely in the simplicity of words, I have uttered the Acts of a most blessed Man which must be made known to the Christian Congregation.

2\. Most blessed Syrus, born from the place which is called Imiliana[[2\]](#_ftn8), not far from the city of Genoa, more or less twice-four miles; in which place it is known all the way into the present day that on his own turf [Born in the field of Genoa] an oracle[[3\]](#_ftn9) was founded in his name. The which being so, it is agreed to be true far from any ambiguity. When he grew from his infancy[[4\]](#_ftn10) into the fruits of his holy practice, he was woved as an oblate[g](#_ftn11) by his parents to Felix, the Abbot of Genoa; and him the man of God certainly, as is the duty of Priests, instructed with every divine tradition. And indeed the Most Blessed Syrus was rich in all good works[h](#_ftn12) [and ordained as deacon/Levite by St. Felix], so that he was venerated by all and loved. And hence it happened, that the holy Priest Felix deemed him worthy of rising to the office of the ministry of Altar. And while happily the Priest was pouring out the offering according to his order[[5\]](#_ftn13), in the place which is labeled up to now Right; and in that day helping at the Sunday table [he sees the right hand of God above the Host], in that place the holy servant Syrus was serving, and the Abbot himself was paying the wovs of the Christian people, above the offering suddenly a gleam sparked and shone forth. In which ray St. Syrus was deemed worthy to see[i](#_ftn14) the Lord's right hand[[6\]](#_ftn15): the which having been seen, the trembling blessed minister prostrated himself on the ground until the Eucharist would be completed.

3\. Thinking about this event[[7\]](#_ftn16), the Priest, concerned that if by chance prodigies should be seen later, as it often happens, he could become proud [exiled to Matutiana], he destined the aforementioned holy minister for exile[[8\]](#_ftn17). Not bearing this badly, the man of God, happy at the order of the Father, proceeded to the place which is called Matutiana[[9\]](#_ftn18). There he found the Co-bishop[[10\]](#_ftn19) Hormisdam, ordained by the aforementioned Blessed Prelate Felix; he was honorably received by him. When he had remained in this place for some time, both men persevering in the praises and service of God, they performed wonders on the sick[j](#_ftn20). In this period, Blessed Syrus with his prayers liberated from a demon a girl who was the daughter of Galio, Imperial Tax-Collector [he frees a possessed person]. To him the above Galio mostly devotedly offered, with undersigned obligation, an estate, which is called Tabia[[11\]](#_ftn21) placed near the river Tabia and the seashore, near to the ridge of the Alps with villeins[[12\]](#_ftn22) and families of both sexes dependent on his jurisdiction, with a chapel built therein in honor of Blessed Peter, Chief of the Apostles; which estate lay at a distance of about four miles from the village of Matutiana, which now is called St. Romulo.

4\. [Called back to the city, he continues steadfastly to preach] In short, the aforementioned Most Blessed Syrus was closely united to the Lord, gleamed with miracles while residing in that same village, until he was recalled all the way to the city of Genoa by Most Blessed Felix, recalling the commoners from error with his predication. And after many days the Father instructed that his minister should return; the Priest addressed him with fatherly mood and with the word of divine charity, saying that wonders had appeared to him: whence it came to be that each was instilled with a greater love of divine favor, shining in their sacred ministry. In the times of these men the Catholic Church was flourishing and rejoicing in the strength of its members; and by order of the Lord the Priest with the deserved name Felix [and the designated successor to Felix] went away to Christ. And so it happened that after these events the entire common people of the city of Genoa, unanimously and with consenting voice, elected sacred minister Syrus into the Priesthood; which is very clearly known to have happened [by divine will]. For he proceeded prosperously in all good deeds[k](#_ftn23), so that he was able to came to relieve all necessities of the common people entrusted to his ministry.

​5\. [Basilisk dangerous to the public] At that time the people were afflicted by the breath of a very powerful serpent, which is commonly known as the Basilisk. And the serpent himself was lying in a well, not far from the nave of the Basilica of the Apostles, which is now known as that of St. Syrus. And as often the people were destroyed by the breath of the snake, the holy Priest remained there, having addressed the population with divine exhortations and spiritual weapons, so that the entire people with fasting and prayers and weeping implored our Lord Christ for three days along with the Priest. Indeed on the third day, he proceeded with the whole multitude to the place where the snake was lying: there, lying prostrate in prayer before the entire populace, he asked the Lord Creator [for salvation]. Indeed, rising from his completed prayer, he instructed a bucket and a rope to be brought at the same time: indeed standing above the mouth of the well, he dipped them into the well with his hands; and he addressed the serpent in this way, saying, “Venomous serpent, and deceiver of souls [he draws it out of the well in which it was living], turn your harmful breath on yourself, and close your mouth, and come up in this bucket. In the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ of Nazareth, you are ordered to come up.” Having heard this, the serpent at the order of the Priest gathered itself immediately into the bucket, which the Priest was holding; which the Priest drawing upward, he showed to the whole people; and the serpent leapt out. And as a matter of fact, it was too horrible, and its[l](#_ftn24) head had a crest in the likeness of a rooster.

6\. Having seen this the whole people, giving thanks to all-powerful God in a unison voice, glorified the Priest, saying, “Truly he is the one who was foretold by David, saying, ‘You will walk above the asp and the basilisk, and you will trample the lion and the dragon[m](#_ftn25).’” And also he laid low the devil, enemy of the human race, [symbolized] with these four words, by the power of Christ[n](#_ftn26); and thus does the Truth speak through itself, “Behold – I have given to you the power to trample over every strength of your enemy[o](#_ftn27).” From the ones saying these things, and similar, the sacred Priest of God asked for silence [from whence thanks to God are given]: the which having been done, thus he addressed the people, saying, “By Christ this salvation has been presented to you”; all those watching were praising the Lord Jesus Christ because the mouth of the serpent was clearly blocked by the power of the holy Man, so that it might not have the power to hurt anyone further. And before everyone the Priest ordered the serpent to fling itself into the sea[[13\]](#_ftn28). When it had been done, all acclaimed him as just and holy, saying, “Truly, he is a servant of God, through whom all divine workings are shown.” 

​7\. Indeed after these things the grace of the healings accompanied him constantly, all the way to the day of his calling: however, know[p](#_ftn29) that the day of his death[[14\]](#_ftn30) is on the day of the Passion [the saint dies on July 6] of the most blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, whose teaching the very good Prelate has followed, on which day truly he deserved the heavenly triumph. On the day of his demise, therefore, while that holy body was dressed on a bed at the basilica of the Apostles, and a limitless populace with a tearful voice was plucking at his garments because of an excess of respect, so that the pallbearers were taking the couch from their shoulders due to the prominence of the crowd; among whom also was a ship's captain of the Libyan Province, acting in very full faith, when he approached that holy body; [blood taken from the nostrils of the dead man] in that place he saw blood flowing from his nostrils. He hurriedly took a cloth, which he had on top of his head, and cleaned away the welling blood. Afterward indeed that holy body was carried to the sepulcher, the captain having returned to his ship, he replaced his headcloth with respect and diligent care; and so prosperity accompanied him setting sail to his own lands, his business complete. And when he approached his own homeland, still placed far off, a crowd of invalids hurried into his path, who were troubled by unclean spirits, saying, “Behold, St. Syrus comes, who has the power to clean us.” And the more his ship approached the harbor, the greater the goad by which they were tormented, even unto flinging themselves into the sea, saying, “Because he now comes who is going to free us.”

​8\. And when he had entered into the harbor, the captain disembarked onto the shore, his anchors fixed. Seeing therefore the crowd standing, and the invalids shouting and saying, “Our liberator has come,” and when the captain was questioned by the people whether he had the Relics of a Saint, he wondered why on earth it should be that the invalids were running toward the shore. But the captain had given those things which had happened in the city of Genoa to oblivion: nevertheless by the voices of the invalids it was confirmed that the Blessed Syrus had arrived. And when they wanted to hurl themselves into the sea, the captain of course brought the very same power back into his mind; how he had been there when the holy body of the blessed Man had been interred; and he said to the many standing by, “Thus I have solemnly remembered: on that day when I was in the Province of Italy in the city of Genoa, a certain Priest of that city had gone over to the Lord; and when his body was being led down to the basilica of the holy Apostles, the crowds rushing in, those who were carrying the body put it down from their shoulders. And when the Christian people drowned[[15\]](#_ftn31) themselves at his very sacred body through an excess of respect, they were plucking at the hem of his garment. Amongst them I, your servant, approaching his holy body, saw blood leaving his nostrils, and with my head covering I cleaned the gore: and besides this deed, I know nothing. Certainly the name of that one who had gone over to Christ was called most blessed Syrus; perhaps this is he about whom the invalids are shouting, as that now it is given to you openly to understand.

​9\. Therefore the captain left for his ship; and the cloth, with which he had cleaned the holy blood, he soon took to the shore. And when they, who were bothering him, were drowning themselves on him, he himself would touch them with the cloth that he had; immediately all were cleansed of their infirmities. The which having been done, the entire people of that place went together to the church with the captain; giving thanks to the all-powerful God; and saying, “Truly salvation has been rendered to us from heaven”. The which having been seen by the Bishop of that place, together with the Christian people, he established a church to his name; and there under the protection of the church they placed the headcloth: by the touch of which invalids were cured of their weaknesses, and they are cured now all the way into the present[[16\]](#_ftn32) day: it is agreed that the burial of Most Blessed Priest and Confessor Syrus was the third day before the Kalends of July: with our Lord Jesus Christ reigning, to whom is the honor and the glory, through countless ages of ages. Amen.

------

[^a]: Literally: *Insignificant, tiny, very small*. Most probably this is not a real name but a nickname given by the author to himself.

[b](#_ftnref2) Literally: orthodox

[[1\]](#_ftnref3)  *Mombrizio*, I have observed/contemplated

[c](#_ftnref4) Cfr. Psalm 93: 10 Douay-Rheims 1899 American Edition “He that chastiseth nations, shall he not rebuke: he that teacheth man knowledge?”

[d](#_ftnref5) Matthew 10:20

[e](#_ftnref6) Most probably, the subject of this verb is Bishop Oberto*.*

[f](#_ftnref7)  That is*, Official Secretary*

[[2\]](#_ftnref8)  *Justinian*, In the village, *he says*, of Morazana, now Molassana – note of the proofreader, or,“Struppa”, if you prefer. *Marianus*: In the village once called Aemiliana, but now commonly called Struppa, where his own house, in which he lived, is preserved in memory of the Saint; *or rather, whichanother man built in the same spot, according to popular tradition. Meanwhile, the name “Struppa” never appears on record, but “Morasana” does, which is at a distance of no more than 3 miles to the north of the city.*

[[3\]](#_ftnref9) *That is,* a chapel/oratory. In the place of which is now the Village of St. Syrus, at a distance of almost one hour or 3 miles. 

[[4\]](#_ftnref10) *Since St. Felix ruled only 20 years, and St. Syrus succeeded him, “childhood” should be understood for “infancy”, all the way to th fourteenth year of his life; thus St. Syrus was only thirty years old when he was consecrated Bishop.*

[g](#_ftnref11) Cfr. http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Oblate

[h](#_ftnref12) Cfr. 1 Timothy 6:18

[[5\]](#_ftnref13) *The Genoan manuscript says this briefly,* And the Saint standing by him at Sunday Mass (*better,* “table”)...etc.

[i](#_ftnref14)  Literally: *of the sight of*

[[6\]](#_ftnref15)  *Marionus says,* He saw the divine majesty in the form of a little boy, that is to say, cheerful and jovial; *there is no basis for this change.*

[[7\]](#_ftnref16)  The which having happened, therefore, the Priest, thinking cautiously about his (Syrus’) best interest.

[[8\]](#_ftnref17) Clearly in a punishment for the divine Office disturbed through that untimely act of devotion.

[[9\]](#_ftnref18) *Mombrizio*, Munduciana: but in this way he constrains in a few words those things which follow, enclosed by these [] brackets, “In that place he would spend time in constant prayers, so that salvation for the sick was evidently obtained by his invocations; and after not many days; *in the manuscript, however, it reads* and after many days (“not”, being ommitted). *Mariano adds that the aforementioned village today has its name from St. Romulo, where he died, as it will show in his Life. Justinian says that it is next to the seafront shore of the town of San Remo; as Genoa lies at a distance of 80 miles to the west.*

[[10\]](#_ftnref19)  *I would prefer to read “*vice-bishop*”, that is, “*bishop head of a ward or region*”, such as, more or less, are now* Rural Deacons *among us; for there were once many such under one Bishop. Mariano adds for the sake of explanation that he had been placed there as Rector (that is, Parson), or Deputy Bishop. In the life of St. Romulus he is called Blessed Hormisdas; but I never find it written in Annals.*

[j](#_ftnref20) Literally: *those who became weak/sick*

[[11\]](#_ftnref21) Tabia, *mis-written* Taggia *in records, lies at a distance from the town of San Remo of 5 miles and from the shore of 2 miles, according to Leander Alberti*

[[12\]](#_ftnref22) *That is, villagers;* Massa says *village*

[k](#_ftnref23) Cfr. 3 John 1:2

[l](#_ftnref24)  Literally, *whose head had...* , relative nexus.

[m](#_ftnref25) Psalm 90:13 (Douay-Rheims)

[n](#_ftnref26)  Literally: *being Christ the originator*

[o](#_ftnref27)  Cfr Luke 10:19

[[13\]](#_ftnref28) *I am deceived if this miracle is not of the type of those which has been handed down to the memory of posterity rather through picture than through scripture. Therefore just as the usage has prevailed when those wanting to express how St. John the Baptist drank a poisoned cup without harm are accustomed to paint him in the act of make the sign of the Cross on the cup whence a serpent sprang forth; I suspect that this happened thus, that the Holy Man, about to cleanse the water of a certain well exhaling a pestiferous vapor, exorcized the water having drunk from the bucket and ordered the exorcized bucket to be flung into the sea, as if at the same time drowning the demon, the author of its evil: which then taken verbatim and explained in the words of this very manner, as if the Holy Man had taken a material basilisk thence and thrown it into the sea.*

[p](#_ftnref29)  Imperative mood

[[14\]](#_ftnref30) *The manuscript:* However may you know that the death of the most blessed Syrus was on the second day before the Nones of July: *and the grounds of proof why it has been changed, as again in the end of this Life, I have already said above.*

[[15\]](#_ftnref31) Drowned, *that is, massed and compressed, in which sense I have not yet read this word used anywhere else.*


[[16\]](#_ftnref32) If this Life was written, as I think, in the 11th century, the author was not able to speak thus about his own time; someone could have written thus from Libya, before it came into the power of the Saracens, or rather before the influx of the Vandals into Africa; and our author has transcribed this word-for-word here: unless instead of “Libya” you wish to understand “Liburnum” (=Leghorn), a port of Etruria on the same shore. There were even some “Libicans” in Italy beyond the river Po, whose city is called Vercellae by Livy and Pliny; but it was unknown in the middle ages, when this was written, and thus they must be Mediterraneans (= living on the sea), as they had no river by which they could be carried to Genoa.
